---
layout: post
title:  "FinTech 2.0"
author: Siddharth
categories: [ FinTech, tutorial ]
image: assets/images/Fintech2.0.jpg
tags: [FinTech]
---

The first era of finTech, was responsible for building the underlying infrastructure for FinTech 2.0 or modern day finTech. FinTech 2.0 started in year 1967, as it marks two important dates in finance and technology.

 - Establishment of first ATM(Automated Teller Machine) machine by Barclays Bank in the UK. Which completely transformed the relationship people had with money and finance in general.
 
 - Launch of handheld calculator by Texas Instruments, these handheld calculator where transformational in the way we do our day-to-day finances.

1967, marks the period where process of digitization began. Digitization is taking processes that were traditionally analog, for example physical calculation of money, bookkeeping and converting them into digital environments.

In late 1960s and early 1970, establishment of domestic and international payment systems, allowing real time money transfers.

SWIFT is an organization that provides protocols that enable communication between domestic digital payment systems. Apart from these developments in payment we see the establishment of NASDAQ in 1971. NASDAQ was the world’s 1st electronic stock exchange.

Today it’s very difficult to find a human being trading securities with another human being in the stock market.

Alternatively let’s look at the foreign exchange market, in which buying and selling of currencies is done. These market today do approximately 5.5 trillion dollars of transaction every day throughout the year and almost none of it takes place in the form of cash. It is almost entirely transactions between two computer systems of these financial institutions. 

In the late 1980, particularly 1987 the market crash gave birth to what we call Programme trading. Programme trading involves preset computerised buy and sell orders which will be triggered when prices go down a certain level. 

This is a type of chain reaction which will further trigger more price drop, triggering more price drop, and eventually resulting in our first coordinated market crash.

In parallel to the emergence of internet technologies and online banking, and at the beginning of the 21st century major financial institutions were having almost a million users online. But still we are waiting to see a financial institution with a billion online users.

This period of building the digitization of financial system hit a major turning point in the year 2008 with the global financial crisis.